Population genetics model section (#24)
popsim-consortium/demes-paper: paper.tex

software processing Demes models should be provided with an unambiguous
representation that is straightforward to process. For efficiency of
understanding and avoidance of model specification error, we require a data
representation without redundancy (i.e., repetition of values). But, for the
simplicity of software working with the Demes model (and the avoidance of
programming error, or divergence in interpretations of the specification) it is
preferable to have an explicit representation, in which all relevant values are
readily available. Thus, we consider three entities: the high-level, human
readable, model specification; the low-level, fully-qualified model
specification; and the parser, which is responsible for transforming the former
into the latter.

\subsection*{Population genetics model}

In Demes, demographic models consist of one or more interacting populations (or
``demes"; to avoid confusion with the name of the specification itself we will
use the term ``population'' in this discussion, in the understanding that the
terms are interchangeable for our purposes). Populations are defined as a

> collection of exchangable individuals that exist a specified period of time,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collection of exchangable individuals that exist for a specified period of time,
```

following a well-defined set of rules regarding population sizes, mating

> systems, etc. Ancestor/descendent relationships between populations can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
systems, etc. Ancestor/descendant relationships between populations can be
```

defined, as well as continuous or instantaneous migration between coexisting
populations.

Population and event times are written as units in the past, so that time zero
corresponds to the final generation or ``now'', and event times in the past are
values greater than zero with larger values for events that occur in the more
distant past. While a natural specification for time units is in generations,

> other time units are allowed, such as years. In the case the the time units are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
other time units are allowed, such as years. In the case that the time units are
```

specified in their order of appearance, so that their times are in descending
order.

Models include one or more populations that have sizes greater than zero for
the duration of their existences, and population sizes are given as the number
of individuals. A population must exist for some duration of time greater than
zero, so that its start time must be larger than its end time. It may have one
or more ancestors, which are other populations that exist at the population's
start time. If one ancestor is specified, the first generation is constructed
by randomly sampling parents from the ancestral population to contribute to
offspring in the newly generated population. If more than one ancestor is
specified, the proportions of ancestry from each contributing population must
be provided, and those proportions must sum to one. In this case, parents are
chosen randomly from each ancestral population with probability given by those
proportions. If no ancestors are specified, the population is assumed to have
start time equal to infinity, as individuals are not assumed to spontaneously
spring into existence.

Within populations, population sizes and mating systems are specified within

> epochs. Epochs are non-overlapping intervals that cover the entire existence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
epochs. Epochs are non-overlapping intervals of time that cover the entire existence
```

interval of the population. Each epoch specifies the population size over that
interval, which can be a constant value or function defined by start and end
sizes that must remain positive.  If an epoch has a start time of infinity, the
population size for that epoch must be constant. Epochs can also specify
parameters for nonrandom mating, such as selfing or cloning rates, which give
the probability that offspring are generated from one generation to the next by

> self-fertilization or cloning of an indivual \textbf{need to precisely specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
self-fertilization or cloning of an individual \textbf{need to precisely specify
```

once this is determined}.

Finally, individuals in a population may have parents from a different
population through migrations. These can be defined as continuous migration

> rates over intervals that populations overlap in time or through instantaneous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rates over time intervals in which the populations coexist or through instantaneous
```

(or pulse) migration events at a given time. Continuous migration rates are

> defined as the probability that parents in the ``destination`` population are
> chosen from the ``source`` population.  Migration rates are thus per-generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
defined as the probability that parents in the ``destination'' population are
chosen from the ``source'' population.  Migration rates are thus per generation
```

and must be less than one. Furthermore, if more than one source population have
continuous migration into the same destination population, the sum of those
migration rates must also be less than one, as rates define probabilities. The
probability that parents come from the same population is just one minus the

> some of incoming migration rates. On the other hand, pulse migration events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sum of incoming migration rates. On the other hand, pulse migration events
```

specify the instantaeous replacement of a given fraction of individuals in a
destination population by individuals with parents from a source population.

> The fraction must be between zero and one, and if more than one source
> population has a pulse migration event to the same destination population and
> the same time, those replacement events are applied sequentially in the order
> that they are specified in the model.

Reviewer: This is not quite sufficient, if one considers two pulses like A->B, B->C. The order here matters, but the pulse destination is different in each case.
```suggestion
The fraction must be between zero and one, and if more than one pulse is defined
for the same time, those replacement events are applied sequentially in the order
that they are specified in the model.
```
